# Neural-Control-of-Movement
4th Year Project

In a movement-learning experiment performed by Sadtler et al. [1], 85 neurons in the motor cortex of rhesus macaques were recorded, with a BCI mapping the neural activity to 2-dimensional cursor velocity on a computer screen. After learning to complete the task, the monkeys were required to relearn the desired cursor movements under different perturbations of the BCI.

Sadtler observed that the ability to successfully relearn the movements depended on the geometric location of the BCI, the control space, in the neural space (the vector space defined by the activity of each neuron). They identified a low-dimensional subspace that captured the natural patterns of co-modulation of the neurons, terming it the intrinsic manifold. If the control-space lay within the intrinsic manifold, the monkey learnt to control the cursor as proficiently as before the perturbation; conversely, if the control space lay outside the intrinsic manifold, the monkey was not able to learn the task as successfully as previously.

Hennig et al. [2] observed that the neural activity in the null-space of the control-space was not able to vary freely, nor did it follow minimal energy principles according to principles governing muscular redundancy. Instead, they proposed the Fixed Distribution Hypothesis, which states that the variability in output-null activity is constrained by the required output-potent activity. The underlying distribution of firing rates is fixed, and so the distribution of null-space activity is dependent on the choice of output-potent direction. If the overall distribution is known, one can predict the distribution of output-null activity for any choice of potent directions and any given output-potent activity.

This project uses a network model of dynamics in the motor cortex to simulate the experiment performed by Sadtler in order to investigate why these empirical phenomena arise from the dynamics of the circuit. The neural dynamics and BCI were modelled as a standard state-space control system, to which two types of optimal control in the form of optimal tracking and state LQR were applied. The measure of cost of each method was found to have an inverse relationship with the amount of variance of the neural space accounted for by the BCI. This result explains the observation made by Sadtler; the less well the control space is aligned with the intrinsic manifold, the more energy and consequently the harder it is for the monkey to learn to control the cursor.

In order to investigate Hennig's observation of null-space activity, optimal tracking was used to generate neuron activity, which was then aligned with the output-potent and output null directions. Different methods of generating null-activity were then compared with the true activity, and the KL divergence used to quantify how well they agreed. It was found that using minimum energy principles to model null-space activity did not explain the true activity accurately, while sampling from a multivariate gaussian distribution conditioned on the required output-potent activity fit the true null-space activity most well. This was independent of the choice of mapping used to track the reference signal. We see, therefore, that the fixed distribution hypothesis proposed by Hennig arises naturally from the structural dynamics of the motor cortex.

## References:

[1] Sadtler, P., Quick, K., Golub, M. et al. Neural constraints on learning. Nature 512, 423–426 (2014).https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13665

[2] Hennig, J.A., Golub, M.D., Lund, P.J., Sadtler, P.T., Oby, E.R., Quick, K.M., Ryu, S.I., Tyler-Kabara,E.C., Batista, A.P., Byron, M.Y. and Chase, S.M., 2018. Constraints on neural redundancy. Elife, 7,p.e36774.
